Good morning everyone.
Welcome to the Quartz
Composer Overview session.
This is going to be the first
of our three Quartz Composer
sessions this year at WWDC.
I'm Pierre-Olivier Latour,
Engineering Manager of
Quartz Composer at Apple.
Can you go back to slides please?
Thanks.
All right, so what are we going to learn
today in these overview sessions?
Well, first of all,
the basics of course of Composer,
how the technology works,
what is it made of?
We'll look at building a simple
composition as an example,
then we'll look at where you
can use those compositions out
of the box inside Mac OS X,
how to leverage the new
composition repository that
we're introducing in Leopard.
We'll also have a rapid look at how
you can integrate compositions directly
inside your applications using our APIs,
interface builders and so on,
and we'll finish on an overview
of what's new regarding course
Composer in Mac OS X Leopard.
So first of all,
what exactly is Quartz Composer?
Quartz Composer is a technology
that's deeply integrated into
the US at a fairly low level.
It's completely built around OpenGL,
which gives us high performances
and a great visual quality.
Now what we do with that technology
is we use it as a visual synthesizer,
and we build compositions.
And compositions,
we're going to learn a lot more
about them in the upcoming hour.
But for now,
you can just consider composition
as some kind of black boxes that
have some input parameters and
produce some output results.
Those compositions can also
interact with the user.
And there are various possibilities,
like the mouse, the keyboard, tablets,
media devices.
It's actually pretty large.
A big difference between this technology
and a number of other graphics
technology we have in the OS is this
one comes with a full featured graphical
editor that is part of the DevTools.
So if you install the
DevTools on Tiger Leopard,
you will have the Quartz Composer tool.
And finally, we have made it so it's very
easy to integrate Quartz Composer
inside your applications.
I mentioned earlier that Quartz
Composer was a really integrated
into the OS technology.
And what it does exactly is it
leverage a number of graphics
and non-graphics technologies.
So as you can see on the slide,
we have typical graphics
technologies like OpenGL of course,
but also Core Image,
Core Video and so on.
And a bunch of non-graphics
one that can be,
you know, Safari, RSS,
JavaScript and so on.
All those technologies are integrated
through Quartz Composer which
you use to build compositions.
And then those compositions are in turn
used everywhere into the operating system
system or inside your own applications.
We have a number of clients that
are using Quartz Composer one way or
another in the system or applications
we ship and there is also of course all
the applications you guys have made.
So for my first demo,
I would like to show you-- can
you switch to a demo machine,
please?
I would like to show you a number of
compositions so that you get an overview
of what exactly are those things.
So let me start with those
two compositions here.
So those are your
typical motion graphics.
So it's animated, it has colors,
and it's moving with time, and so on.
We have another one here that is a little
more complex than the first one here.
This one has text.
And you can see that there is also
another text in the background,
and that text is blurred
and has a real-time blurring
effect that's going on it.
Now the first thing to notice
with compositions is that I can
actually resize the window.
"And the rendering remains sharp.
I can go full screen and the
rendering will stay perfectly sharp.
And that's a very important
thing about compositions is
the fact that they're visually,
they're independent of the
rendering destination size.
A usual way to do animations
is to use particle systems.
So Quartz Composer has a simple particle
system that's built in and I just
want to show you rapidly two examples.
This one is, you know,
a typical kind of fireworks thing
made with a particle system.
But you can do completely different
things with particle system.
For example,
this blobby object that's moving around,
it's also a particle system.
I mentioned earlier that compositions
can have input parameters.
So what I can do here is I can
display them and this composition
has a number of settings and
take a primary input as an image.
So let's use a
"I have a demo image for that and
now what I can do is control all
the parameters of the composition to
control how the effect is applied.
So in that case I can apply a glow,
I can kind of warm the image,
control the fading, those kind of things.
So that's the second big
point about composition.
They're not completely
opaque black boxes.
They're actually,
you can communicate with
them and control the inputs."
Among the technologies that
I mentioned earlier that are fully
integrated inside QuartzComposer,
there is Core Image, obviously.
And you can use QuartzComposer as a
development environment for Core Image.
You can write your own
Core Image kernels.
So I have two examples here that
were made by Apple engineers.
The first one is kind of rotating gears,
and it's completely done
on a GPU using Core Image.
It's not two images that are rotating
around or anything like that.
It's computed on a
GPU and drawn on a GPU.
I have another example here that's great.
It's July iteration fractal thing.
And it's also done on a GPU.
And it's a Core Image filter that
is written inside QuartzComposer.
I mentioned you could use
various input devices,
the biggest of all being the camera
that we now have on a number of Macs.
So here I have a composition that
is actually using the video camera
that's on that machine and a number of
effects with core image and feedback
rendering and so on and you can achieve
some pretty cool effect with that.
Still on interactivity,
I wanted to show you another one.
So here I have a regular tablet
and what I can do with it and the
pen is I have a composition that
reacts to pressure sensitivity
and also to the speed and so on.
And we use that to do some rendering
in Core Image with feedback and you
achieve that very nice trailing effect.
And to conclude that series
of demo compositions,
I'm going to show you
another interactivity that's
possible in Quartz Composer,
and in that case, it's using MIDI.
So here I have a regular MIDI keyboard
with a bunch of controls on it and
various parameters of that composition
have been just wired to the MIDI.
So now what I can do is by tweaking
the sliders and everything,
I can control the color,
the size as well as the rotation,
everything regarding that composition.
Back to slides please.
All right.
So now how exactly does
Quartz Composer work?
How is it conceived?
Well, at the base of Quartz Composer,
we have what we call patches.
They're the basic processing units.
That's what we use to
build those compositions.
So a patch is something that is
executed by the Quartz Composer engine.
It gets some input parameters
through input ports,
and it will produce a result either by
producing that result on output ports
or by rendering it on the destination,
which typically is the screen.
So you can say that those patches
are like programming functions.
They take a number of inputs.
They might also depend on time,
and they produce a given result.
Let's look at a few examples here.
So the first patch here is LFO,
which stands for Low Frequency Osteator.
So it means it's a patch that produces
a wave that's oscillating with time.
So typically, it will depend on time.
Its result would be the height of
the wave at a given point in time.
It will have parameters
like the type of the wave,
if it's a sinusoidal wave, a square wave,
triangular, and so on,
as well as the period and the amplitude.
Now, not all patches need to
have inputs and outputs.
For instance,
the mouse patch here only has outputs,
because its goal is only to output
the x and y position of the mouse.
The other way, you can have patches
that only have inputs.
So the sprite patch,
which draws a quad on
screen with an image,
has two inputs to position that quad,
one to receive the image.
to draw in that quad,
as well as a color you can
use to modulate the image.
So all those patches receive the
data and potentially produce data
through inputs and output ports,
and we support a number of types.
We support values that can be
numerical values like Booleans,
floating point values, string,
and colors,
but we also support more complex objects.
Two of them specifically, a structure,
which is a generic data container,
like an NSRA, NSDictionary,
that kind of thing,
as well as a generic image container,
and that's one of the
most powerful things.
I'm saying generic image
container because it doesn't
matter what the image contains.
It could be texture on the GPU,
it could be an image on disk,
or whoever knows what,
but what you manipulate
inside Course Composer is
an OPEC image container.
I'd like to show you now the
basics of Quartz Composer and
a rapid tour of the editor.
So let me launch the editor.
The editor is located inside the
developer applications folder in Leopard
and located in developer application
graphic tools on Tiger machines.
I'm going to change a quick thing
here and create a blank document.
So that's the Quartz
Composer environment.
The biggest thing is obviously
the viewer on the right here,
which renders the composition,
where you can visualize in real
time what the composition does.
Then we have the editor
on the left side here,
which is where you assemble the
patches we just talked about.
This editor is made of a number of pens.
The biggest one is the workspace.
We assemble the patches.
And then here on the left,
you can see a pretty big list of patches,
and we have probably 150
to 200 patches right now.
And core image filters and Quartz
Composer built-in patches and so on.
So what I'm going to do here is build
a simple composition to demonstrate to
you the principles of Quartz Composer.
Now for extensive knowledge on
how to build compositions and
way more complex than that,
you would need to go to the
Wednesday session of Quartz
Composer in the morning,
which will be a hands-on session
and cover deeply how to build
compositions and build efficient ones.
So the first thing I'm going to do
is paint the viewer with a gradient.
So I can search in the list of
patches for a patch that's going
to allow me to paint a gradient.
So here it is.
You can see-- let me just
zoom in-- you can see that the
gradient has a number of inputs.
It should be pretty straightforward,
you know, start color, middle color,
end color, and so on.
To edit one of those inputs,
I can just double click on them.
So I'm going to set it to blue.
Edit the three to various
shades of the same blue.
Okay.
Now what I'm going to use is an image.
I would like to draw an image
on top of that gradient.
So let's import an image.
In our case,
the one of the new Quartz Composer logo.
And there are many ways in Quartz
Composer to display an image,
but I'm going to use the simplest of all,
which is using a billboard patch.
The billboard part has inputs like,
you know, what's the image to display
and where to display it.
I have my image in that patch here and
I got the billboard on the right there.
So what I need to do now is
connect the image output to the
image input of the billboard.
And now the billboard has the
image it needs to display.
What I'm going to do here is
slightly move it to the right.
So that's better for what's coming.
Then a cheap way to add animation,
like I mentioned at the very beginning,
is to use a particle system.
So let's add an instance
of the particle patch.
The particle system,
for those of you who don't know,
is a system of particles,
like the name implies,
that are actually evolving with time.
And the evolution happens taking
into account a number of parameters,
like the velocity of the particles,
their sizes.
And then particles can disappear
after a certain amount of time,
and gravity is also taken into account,
and so on.
Right now we see a number of white
boxes that are moving around.
Those are the particles,
but they don't have an image on them.
So let's import an image.
Same technique as before.
And the first thing I'm going to do
here is change the way the images
are composited on top of each other.
There are several what
we call blending modes,
and in that case I'm going to set
it to "Add." So now we get a nice
saturation effect and the blackness
of the image has disappeared.
When you want to edit a number
of parameters in the editor,
you don't have to double
click on every of them.
We actually have an inspector
with a number of pens,
and one of them is input parameters,
and it lists in one single area all the
input parameters of the selected patch.
So here I'm going to
do a couple of changes.
First of all,
I'm going to remove the attraction
so that the particles just fly away.
I'm going to add some gravity
so that they slowly fall down.
And what I would ultimately like is to
have the particles emit from the top of
the WAN and go towards the left side,
like that.
So I'm going to have to control the
initial velocities of those particles.
Now I'm also going to want them to be,
to go higher,
so that means make sure they
don't start going with a velocity
that would make them going down.
That's good enough.
And finally, we don't care about Z,
so I'm just going to-- we
don't care about the depth,
so I'm just going to have
them go towards the left.
Now what I can do is position the
origin of that particle system
approximately on the top of the wand.
So here we go.
Something like that.
Now the last thing I can
do is add some colors.
If I click on the color input,
then I can see directly the
color picker where I can select,
you know, various colors.
But ideally you would like to
have that changing with time so
that it's automatically animated.
Here's the color input.
What I want to change
in the color is the hue.
I don't care about the other components.
I want them constant.
Fortunately,
we have a patch that's called
HSL Color that takes hue
saturation and luminosity inputs
and builds a color out of that.
So I'm going to connect the
output of the color patch of the
HSL color patch to the color input.
And now just reduce the luminosity
to 60%. Probably going to be good.
And now I can play with the U.
And you can see all the colors are
changing in the particle system.
There is one last step to make
that automatically animating.
Basically what I need is to use a patch
that's going to generate a value between
0 and 1 that's continuously oscillating.
So the LFO is a good thing for that.
And its default settings actually
generate a value between 0 and 1,
so it's all good.
And you can see here what's happening.
So now my particle system is
starting to look pretty good.
What I have to do is add some text,
and it will look even better.
So how do you add text
in Quartz Composer?
Quartz Composer is ultimately
built around images,
so we're going to generate an
image which has text inside it.
And there is a patch that's called
Image with String that does exactly that.
How do we display an image
while still using the billboard
as it's the simplest way?
Image Restring provides us a convenience
output which is the optimal width
at which to display that image.
So I'm just going to make that as well.
And now I can change a
couple of things on the text.
Namely the font,
so I'm going to set it to Lucida Grande,
bold, let's see.
Here we go.
Change the character size to a
little bigger and then just move
the image slightly to the left.
And to have that text
be a bit less boring,
I'm going to add an effect on it.
We have all the core image filters
available in Quartz Composer,
so I'm just going to pick one.
Keep its default setting,
the Bloom filter.
And now, I have my texture.
So remember, at the very beginning,
I mentioned that one of the very
important things about composition is
that they can have input parameters.
So how do we add input
parameters to that composition?
Well, it's pretty straightforward.
First of all here,
what could be our input parameters?
Well, the text is an obvious answer,
but there is also the general
color of the background.
So let's make those two input parameters.
I can control click
on the ImageRisString,
and there is a contextual
menu that appears.
And in there,
I can select the input I want
to publish to the upper level,
and that's going to turn it into
a parameter of the composition.
So I'm going to select the
string input and read a text.
And now, if I display the input
parameters of the composition,
I have a text here,
which I can change to whatever I want,
and it's becoming an
input of the composition.
The Gradient is an interesting case
because it has three color inputs.
However, that wouldn't be very useful
to publish those three colors.
What you want is to have a single
color and control it and have the two
others be built upon the first one.
There is a pretty convenient
patch that we have called a
splitter when you want to connect
a single input to multiple outputs.
So I'm just going to create one,
make it color because that's what
I want to move through that splitter,
color subject.
Connect it to start.
And now I can set the input
of the splitter to the same
blue we originally had.
So we're pretty much
back to the beginning,
except now I'm going to compute
the middle and end color
according to that start color.
And for that we have a patch
that's called Color Transformation.
So let's create two instances of it.
Have the color go through them
and back to middle and end.
And finally, all I have to do is change
The luminosity so that each
of those two colors is darker
than the very original one.
And finally, I can take the color input
that's on that splitter,
publish it,
Give it a name,
and now I have a composition
which has two inputs,
text and color.
So that concludes our simple composition.
I would like to get back to slides,
please.
For the next few slides,
I would like to do some theory,
but be assured it's going to be short
just so that we get the principles right.
So this is pretty much what we build,
a number of patches with inputs
and outputs on the workspace.
Then we interconnect those patches.
Some of those patches are
going to pull data from the
other one and render something.
So you can see an example here in red.
Then what we can do is assemble
those patches into a macro patch.
Pretty much like you group your
functions when you're programming,
it's the same concept.
What becomes interesting is that we
could say for instance that the central
patch here is itself another macro
patch made of sub-patches whose inputs,
whose summing of the inputs and
outputs have been published.
And are therefore connected to
the patch at the above level.
So we can go a long way with that and
build a hierarchical patch of three,
uh, tree of patches, that's better.
Then what you have,
since it's a tree of patches,
is obviously a root.
So that's what we call the
root patch of the composition.
And this is pretty much
what a composition is.
It's just a tree of macro patches and at
each level they're all interconnected.
And they produce a topology from
which you have data that goes in,
data that goes out,
and a result is rendered.
Now how does that exactly
execute within the engine?
Well, it's pretty straightforward.
The engine starts at the top
level of the composition.
And then it's going to
see it's a macro patch.
So it's going to go to the lower
level to compute all the sub-patches.
One of them turns to be a macro patch.
So it goes another level down
and so on until all is computed,
and it can go back up and
produce the final result.
And how are things executed exactly
at a given macro patch level?
So here's a typical example.
You can see we only have five patches,
a clear one that paints the screen,
a sprite that draws an image.
And then you can guess that
the position of the sprite is
determined by the mouse position,
and the width and height are
kind of oscillating on their own.
The first thing to know here is
that not all patches are equal.
We have three types of patches.
Most important of them are the consumers.
We call them consumers because
they're the ones pulling
data from the other patches,
and they're the ones that actually
produce the result and render something.
In the Quartz Composer Editor,
you will see them, recognize them,
because they have that pink color.
And another important thing about them is
the fact they're rendering a given order.
That's important when you draw on screen.
So you can see as well on the top
right hand corner of those sprites,
of those patches, there is a number which
indicates the execution order.
Then we have processors,
which are pretty much lazy patches.
They just execute whenever the
inputs are needed and whenever the
inputs are changing or the time is
changing if they depend on the time.
They just do data processing.
Pretty basic.
The third type of patches
we have are providers.
So they're required when you want
to have data that comes from the
outside world inside Quartz Composer.
And they have the specificity that they
execute whenever the outputs are needed,
obviously,
but not more than once per frame
that Quartz Composer renders.
The idea being that if one of
those patches are typically
connected to a hardware device,
there is no point in curing the hardware
device more than once per frame when you
want to use the data in the composition.
So now it's time to look
at how it exactly executes.
So remember, consumer first in the order.
So we start with clear.
Then we go to Sprite.
And Sprite has inputs that
depends on other patches.
So they're undetermined.
They need to be computed first.
So the other patches that
it depends on are computed.
Then when all the results are available,
the Sprite can render.
It's now time to look at where
you can use your composition
out of the box in Mac OS X.
And we've got great support
in Mac OS X and it's getting
even better in Leopard.
You can use your composition
as screen savers,
you can use them as animated desktops,
we have full QuickTime support,
and we now have also WebKit support,
so that means Safari, Dashboard,
and so on.
Let me do some demos here.
Let's start with the
composition we just built.
And the easiest way to use the Composer
in Mac OS X is simply as a screen saver.
So I can open the screen server folder
that's located into the library folder,
drop the composition into it,
go to System Preferences, Screen Servers,
And in the part they appear
in the other category.
Here we go.
And that's my screen saver.
Now what's cool is the input parameters
of that composition are available
as options on the screen savers.
So here I can change that.
Whatever.
Okay.
Oops.
Here we go.
And that doesn't touch the
original Composition file.
Those are just input parameters
that are saved as preferences.
New in Leopard,
we can use the same composition
as Animated Desktop,
which is pretty cool too.
So here we go.
See, now you have those nice
obnoxious backgrounds now
all the time when you work.
And it can get even better.
So for instance,
I have a great composition to
use here as an animated desktop.
It takes a couple seconds to work,
but here we go.
So very relaxing and you know
it's really animated desktop.
The whole thing is
working fine on top of it.
Except I'm not going to keep
that around for the demos because
I want you guys to focus on Quartz
Composer and not on some ducky.
So let's see.
Here we go.
All right, so those are pretty easy
way to use Composition,
but that's not very professional.
I think we all agree.
And we have professional support
kind of thing for Quartz Composer.
So I can still use the exact
same Composition we built,
open it in QuickTime,
And it's natively supported.
I can resize.
Remember, composition is independent
of the rendering size and
QuickTime supports that.
So when I go full screen,
it's still perfectly sharp.
I can even control the
composition playback,
you know, back and forth in time.
When it gets even better
is what if I save the file?
You can see Self Content Movie,
they're saying here
About 170 kilobytes.
So for something that's resolution
independent that you can use in any
application that supports QuickTime,
that's pretty powerful.
I'll let you imagine the size of that
file if you wanted to have it in,
let's say, 1600 by 900 in, you know,
25 frames per second, full quality.
It would be gigabytes of data.
Here, whatever the length,
it's going to be-- the duration,
it's going to be 170 kilobytes.
Another support that we added
in Mac OS X Leopard is WebKit.
So I can just launch Safari and
still use our same composition.
And it will play within WebKit browsers.
Well, that's pretty limited,
but hopefully we can do a
lot more than just playback.
You can actually control the
composition from JavaScript.
We have a full JavaScript API that
allows you to control the playback
and as well as communicate with it.
A typical example is Dashboard.
That's a great place where you can do
amazing widgets using Quartz Composer.
So I got a few demos here.
Let me start with this one.
It's a simple widget that's
rendering a composition.
You can see it's interactive,
the glowing effect, transparency,
all the things you can
get with Quartz Composer.
This other one here is a bit more
complex and it's rendering a graph,
it's a very simple graph,
it's basically a proof
of concept and the data,
the names that are displayed in
that area as well as the bars,
the height of the bars is
coming directly from JavaScript.
So you can start seeing that
you can do pretty powerful
AJAXing with JavaScript doing
data processing and so on,
giving the result to the
composition for display.
As another example of that concept,
I would like to show you this photocast.
Let's hope we have an
internet connection.
OK, we do.
What this one does is there is a
JavaScript back end that is retrieving
some images from the internet.
And then they go through the composition
where some filter is applied.
We made it very simple in that case,
just a CPR.
And the result is displayed
into that album kind of thing,
where each of those
subviews is a composition.
Now each time I actually
show Dashboard again,
it refreshes the images.
As you can imagine,
you can build way more complex
widgets than those simple examples.
I'd like to go back to slides, please.
Let's talk a little bit about
the details of QuickTime support.
Well, first of all,
it's Micros 10 Tiger only part only.
That means no prior version of Micros
10 or no Windows or anything else.
If you want to actually use a
Composition on the platform,
you would have to render it in
QuickTime as a regular movie file.
We have a few restrictions as well.
If your Composition requires user
events like keyboard and mouse,
those do not get through right
now in a QuickTime pipeline,
so we're not handling them
at the Composition level.
For security reason,
we have to disable all
Internet communications,
so that means if your Composition
download images or RSS feeds or
anything like that from the Internet,
it won't work within the
QuickTime environment.
And finally, for QuickTime programmers,
you cannot access through
the QuickTime API at the
Composition input parameters.
So it's pretty much playback,
but remember, we have a great quality.
However, in QuickTime,
there is no concept for tracks
that have infinite time--I mean
infinite duration and no size at all.
So we need the track that is
created when you open a Composition
inside QuickTime is a track of
type QDZ for Course Composer.
And this track is going to have
default dimensions and duration.
It doesn't really matter regarding
the dimension when you draw it on
screen or display it because remember,
it's going to be displayed
at the final size anyway.
However,
if you were to export it or if you
were to convert it to another format,
then the track size are going
to matter and you're going to
have to pay attention to that.
Another important point is the
characteristic of the track,
especially if you want to interleave
it with other video materials.
The frames that are produced by the track
are progressive and use square pixels and
the alpha channel is completely valid.
So you can do completely valid blending
with all the tracks underneath and so on.
For best performances,
if you have a QuickTime application and
you want to support Course Composer,
you would need to use the
new API in QuickTime 7,
namely the visual context and core
video or for high level programmers,
QD Kit and HIMovieView.
If you don't and use the old API,
GWorld and Friends,
it's still going to work but
it's just going to be pretty,
pretty slow.
Another important thing
is the WebKit support.
It's Mac OS X Leopard,
or we also have it in Tiger 10.4.7 now.
It's only working in
WebKit-based browsers,
like I mentioned earlier,
the best client being Dashboard.
Not all patches are available
for security reasons.
The same thing,
we have a white list of patches that
we allow in the WebKit environment.
Typically,
we block access to some devices,
like the video camera, for instance.
What's very interesting and powerful is
the fact you can access the composition
through the DOM and talk to it
through JavaScript API to control the
playback or access the input outputs.
And finally, we also have transparency.
Remember my first example.
Now I would like to cover
the Composition Repository.
So that's brand new.
We're introducing that
in Mac OS X Leopard.
The concept here is that let's have
in a system a central location for
Quartz Composer composition files.
Anything you put at that
location is shared system-wide.
Apple is putting compositions in there,
a number of effects and
animated background and such.
And to install new ones,
you just have to drag and drop them.
I mean, you just have to drag and drop
them in the appropriate locations.
It's exactly like a phone folder.
And we provide an API and a way for
applications to curate that repository.
We have a few clients right
now at that seat of Lepard.
They're PhotoBoost and iChat,
which leverage the repository
for all their effects.
And the client's going to
be your own applications.
Now, the compositions that
go into that repository,
they're a bit special.
We're really focusing on the concept of
the composition as a graphic module that
takes inputs and produce output result.
So it has to communicate with
the host application through
some standard inputs and outputs.
Otherwise,
you get a composition from the repository
and you don't know how to use it.
So we're defining a new thing here,
which are composition protocols.
And we're going to talk about
that just more in a minute.
But for now, just consider defining
inputs and outputs.
We have an updated version of the editor
that is building such compositions which
are tagged with the proper protocols.
So what exactly are protocols?
For those of you who are
familiar with Objective-C,
it's pretty much the same thing
as a protocol in Objective-C.
It defines a set of inputs and
outputs in the scope of a given usage,
and it guarantees that any composition
that complies to that protocol
will have those inputs and outputs.
For instance,
let's look at a transition composition.
So a transition takes two images.
They're going to come in
through inputs of type image,
one with the name input image,
the other one with the
name input target image.
And the result is going to be
another image that comes on an output
port with the name output image,
and also depends on time in that matter.
We have a few protocols that are
available in that Leopard Seed.
Animation, in the simplest of all,
it simply defines that you can use
that composition that is suitable for
background animations or foreground,
like screen savers, animated desktop,
those kind of things.
We have filters, we have imaging,
image out, we have transitions,
two imaging, one image out.
Using the Composition Repository
programmatically is really simple.
We introduce a new class in
Objective-C that's called QC Composition.
And it's an OPEC object that represents
a composition in a repository.
And it's OPEC because you
don't know what the backup is,
where the file is,
or those kind of details.
The only thing you can do with that
QC Composition object is curate
and access to the usual attributes,
name, description, and so on,
as well as obviously the protocol list.
But you also have access to a
unique persistent identifier,
which allows you to refer to
that composition later in time.
And the identifier is persistent,
so you reboot your machine,
you move the composition among
the various repositories,
all those kind of things.
You will be guaranteed,
as long as the composition is somewhere,
that you can retrieve
it with that identifier.
To query programmatically
the CompositionRepository,
there is that
QCCompositionRepository class.
It's a shared instance.
So you just get the shared instance.
And then you ask,
give me all the compositions that
comply to all those protocols
and that have those attributes.
So the protocols are end operation.
So the compositions have to comply
to all of them at the same time,
because potentially,
you can have compositions that
implement multiple protocols.
And you can do kind of
post-filtering of the results,
specifying attributes,
like I only want the composition that
complied to the image filter protocol,
but made by Apple or made
by this other manufacturer,
those kind of things,
so that's what the attributes are for.
To make it even easier to use
the Composition Repository,
we're introducing a new UI,
Standard Composition Picker,
that you can either embed in
your application as a standalone
panel version or as an embedded
view in an existing window.
Now, you get those composition,
QC Composition objects either
programmatically or using the pickers.
And how do you use them?
Well,
we extended our playback APIs in the
Quartz Composer API so that they can
take those QC Composition objects.
So the QC view, the QC Composition layer
for core animation,
we'll talk more about that in a bit,
the QC renderer for low-level rendering,
it's very straightforward.
They all take a QC Composition object.
So let's recap the basics of
the Composition Repository.
First thing,
you want to show the picker on screen
so that the user can pick a composition.
So we get the composition panel,
we configure it to display compositions.
Now, you can see here that you configure
it to display composition of a given
protocol and a subset of attributes.
We don't say protocols because it would
be pretty inconsistent from a UI point of
view if you were able to display in the
panel compositions that are transitions
and other that are filters and whatnot.
It would be confusing.
So you have to settle down on one
protocol and have the user select
one composition among that list.
Then we need to set a delegate
so that the panel can call us
back and finally display it.
Then in a delegate,
you're simply going to have
to implement that method.
Composition picker panel
did select composition,
which is called whenever the user
selects a composition object.
And then you get a QC composition.
And from then on, you can pass it to one
of the numerous QC APIs,
like if you had a QC view around,
you would simply do load composition.
So let's do a demo of that
Composition Repository.
So let me launch this
Composition Repository Browser,
which is a simple demo app that we built.
You can see the picker in its
HUD version that I mentioned earlier.
And we have a number of compositions
that are right now in the repository.
Most of them are placeholders.
We'll have, obviously,
the final set of composition for
the final version of Laypart.
But for now, you can experiment with
the repository using those.
So selecting one of those compositions,
they appear here in a standard QC view.
Here you can see I can edit all
the parameters of the composition,
change the color,
and the various speeds and so on.
We have plenty of image
filters that are built in.
As you can see here,
some of them are coming from PhotoBush.
Some of them are new ones.
So I can just select them and
then display in the QC view.
And I can change the input
image to something else.
So here we go.
Works fine.
And it's very straightforward.
There's no code in that demo.
and you can browse the
composition picker,
you know,
just clicking letters and so on.
And finally, we have a few transitions
that we put in the repository.
Some of them are coming
straight from Core Image.
Other ones were added like this cube
one or this sliver effect as well.
Now let's look at building such
a composition for the repository.
The editor has been updated so
When I launch it,
I can select "New from template"
and you will have a template
to build an appropriate
composition from the repository.
What we're going to build in that
case is a simple image filter.
So the composition workspace is
prepopulated with the required
inputs and outputs for that filter.
If I display the input
parameters of the composition,
I can see, obviously, an input image.
And there is actually-- I didn't mention
that in the slide-- but there is an
optional input for the filter protocol
which the host application may use
to indicate if it's OK to display the
filter and can have a preview mode that
is lower quality and therefore faster.
So we're going to ignore that for now.
So let's pick up demo image here.
And if I connect the input image,
: I'm going to show you how to
create a simple blueprint effect.
It's fairly straightforward to
build using some core image filters.
First one I'm going to
need is Color Posterize.
Going to insert it in the middle.
And now all I need to do is kind
of colorize the result to make
sure it's in a single color.
And we have a convenient filter
for that which is false color.
So I'm going to insert that in a chain.
And now I can look at the colors
and change it to blue and white.
And now I have a great
kind of blueprint effect.
You can go through a few more
iterations and improve that effect.
So I'm going to show you
here the final version.
Okay,
so you can recognize here the original
color posterized and false color.
Here there's some more core image filters
on a custom kernel to kind of build
those little edges that you can see
and improve the quality of the effect.
And the other thing that was done here
is take the overall blue color and make
it an input parameter as well so that
we can change that to whatever we want.
Now what I can do with that composition
is just take the composition folder
that is located in library compositions,
take the blueprint, drop it there.
Now if I relaunch the composition
browser and go to image filter,
well now it's just there and
you can see the color is there.
Oops, there we go.
And I can also launch PhotoBoost.
[Transcript missing]
We have numerous ways for you
to integrate Quartz Composer
content inside your application.
The easiest of all is the QC view,
which is a subclass of NSU that allows
you to do Quartz Composer playback.
It also has--it can also be used
directly in Interface Builder
and has Cocoa Binding support,
but that doesn't mean you
have to use it this way.
You can also use it
completely programmatically.
We have new in Mac OS X Leopard
the QC Composition Layer for
fully native integration inside
a core animation environment.
And for people who want to integrate
Quartz Composer into kind of
already existing engines or do
low-level processing of composition
and control completely what's
happening during the rendering,
they can use our low-level
QC renderer class,
and that class will be covered
extensively tomorrow during the
advanced Quartz Composer session.
So let's do a quick demo
of that QCview integration.
I'm going to use here the old version
of the interface builder because the
components we require for that demo,
it's not complete yet.
So first of all,
let's create a blank application.
Then the first time you
use Interface Builder,
you need to add the
Quartz Composer palette.
So you can do that through the
preferences and it's located in,
let's see, Leopard Developers
There we go.
Developer, Extra, Palettes,
and Quartz Composer.
That's good.
All right.
Okay, I'll just try it again.
: Go figure.
OK.
So now I have that palette which
showcases a number of elements,
but the two we're only interested in
today are the QC view here and the
QC patch controller for Cocoa Bindings.
Let's instantiate the QC view.
Oops, I'm just going to configure
it to resize with the window.
And what we can have here is in
the attributes the ability to
load a composition on the view.
So I'm just going to click on
the load button and load our
very initial compositions.
Now I can run the Nib file and you
will see the composition just plays and
it resized correctly and everything.
So it was zero cutting.
But we can do something
that's more interactive,
still without leaving
IB and cutting anything.
So I'm going to upload the composition
and just resize that to 320 by 240.
And when you want to do Cocoa bindings,
you need a controller.
So we have a QC patch controller.
So remember, it's the model view paradigm
in Objective-C where you have
a model that is your data set.
Then you have a controller
that acts as an intermediary
between the model and the view.
In our case, the view is a QC view,
the model is the composition,
and the controller is
a QC patch controller.
In the attributes of
the QC patch controller,
I can load a composition file.
What I did is slightly modified the
BluePrint effect that was built earlier
so that it's kind of autonomous.
And I added a few things here.
First of all, there is now a video input
patch that grabs video from
the camera on the computer.
Then the video is processed to
improve the quality of the image by
doing fairly simple noise reduction.
Then it goes through the Blueprint
effect that we built just earlier,
the exact same one.
And finally,
there is a macro here that draws
the composition with the frame
that you can notice around here.
And we also have another macro
here that handles the text
display in the lower left corner.
This composition has
two input parameters,
a color, the name color,
and an arbitrary text with the name text.
So back to IB.
On the QC patch controller,
I can select that composition
file I just showed to you.
Then I can go to select the QC view,
show the bindings span,
and the QC view has a
binding that's called patch,
and it's simply the patch that
the QC view is going to render.
So let's configure that.
We want to bind to the
QC patch controller.
And that's, remember,
that's a controller that is
loading our composition and so on.
What we want to retrieve from it is
the top patch of the composition,
the root patch,
because this is what we want to display,
and we can do that simply
with the patch controller key.
Now I can run this little nib file,
and it's pretty much as if you had loaded
the file directly on the Composition.
It does the same.
When it becomes more powerful is
that I can now use Cocoa Bindings
to talk to the Composition.
Remember, we have two inputs.
So let's take a color.
Add it there.
And I can bind more of that color
well control to the patch controller,
retrieve the root patch
of the Composition.
Then retrieve the color input,
and from that color input, get the value.
Okay, so now Cocoa Bindings,
it just works.
I have a second input that was text,
so let's build that as well.
[Transcript missing]
And I'm going to have that button
perform the copy action on the view.
All right, now I have a little
autonomous application that
allows me to type text and
[Transcript missing]
I'm sure you're all wondering
where I'm going with this demo.
Well, I am going somewhere and I'm going
to build a little comic here.
You'll see how you can build a little
application very fast and use it.
So let's switch.
Some text.
Okay.
Okay, I'll put that here.
Here we go.
All right.
Live comic, no Xcode, no code, nothing.
Okay, back to slides please.
The QC view you have
in Interface Builder,
you can access it
programmatically in your nib file.
And the API is pretty straightforward.
You can control rendering completely,
start, stop, pose, all those things.
You can load a new
composition file on it,
load composition from file.
In Mac OS X Leopard,
we have a new method that's
called unloadComposition.
The point is that if you
have your QC view around,
and you don't need the
composition anymore,
you can just unload it,
and this will save resources from
the video card and the CPU and so on.
So it's a good thing
to do if you can do it.
To communicate with the composition,
the API is also straightforward.
You can retrieve the values properly,
like the attributes, you know, name,
description, those kind of things,
as well as the list
of inputs and outputs.
To access the inputs and outputs,
you need to call setValueForInputKey
or valueForOutputKey.
New in Leopard, we have that new method,
valueForOutputKeyOfType,
which allows you to explicitly
request for the output object
to be in a given class.
So let's look at what's supported here.
Remember, we have a number of port
types in Course Composer,
Boolean index numbers, and so on.
And for each of them,
there are a number of object
classes that are supported
when you pass input objects.
For instance, a color input port,
you can pass an NSColor, obviously,
but you can also pass a
CGColorRef and CIColor.
And if that color port was an output,
you would also be able to
retrieve one of those three.
When it comes to images,
we support a great
number of image formats.
Inputs and outputs.
What's important here, however,
is that you make sure you always pass
the original image to Course Composer.
For instance,
if you have a Core Video Buffer,
pass the Core Video Buffer
to Course Composer.
Do not pass, like, the Core Video Buffer
converted to a texture and
then pass that texture object.
Or the Core Video Buffer converted
to a CI image and pass the CI image.
Always pass the primitive.
It's important.
This way,
you ensure maximum performances.
Now it's time to look at the
new Quartz Composer API and
patches we have in Leopard.
First of all, the most important request
from developers is the ability
to write your custom patches.
We made it very simple and
powerful like the rest of QC and we
completely leverage Objective-C 2.0,
so that's really a great thing.
You're still going to have to wait
a little more to discover that.
It will be fully covered during
tomorrow's session in the afternoon,
the Advanced Course Composer 1.
Then we have a number of new patches,
one that is the Composer that
allows you to load a Composition
within Composer Composition.
That's also going to be covered
in details tomorrow afternoon.
And then other patches like
GLSL support and so on.
We added a number of methods to
the QCVU to be able to do basic
things like going full screen,
in and out of full screen,
retrieve the current image
on the QCVU as a snapshot,
and what's great here is you can get the
snapshot in your favorite image format.
So, you know, CG image, CI image,
and the QCVU will take
care of everything.
Downloading the image from the GPU,
putting it on a CPU,
flipping it vertically if it's necessary,
all those kind of things.
We made the QC view more powerful.
We added a number of methods so
that you can suspend rendering,
pause it, and resume it.
We have advanced method
that allows you to,
if you subclass QC view,
kind of customize an interface directly
with the rendering of the QC view.
So that's a pretty powerful feature,
as well as the ability to retrieve
the internal OpenGL context for
sharing or using that subclassing.
And those last two points will be
covered as well in a two more session.
We made the QC renderer better with the
ability to integrate it even lower in
your existing OpenGL pipeline so you can
now use a CGL context object as well as
provide the output color space into which
Quartz Composer should render and we
only support RGB color space right now.
For those of you who want to do
off-screen rendering of composition,
well, it's never been easier.
You just need to call
initOffScreenWithSize,
and it will take care of everything--
creating the OpenGL context,
creating the OpenGLP buffer.
So you don't have to
deal with OpenGL at all.
You will just create a
QC renderer off-screen,
and you can get the image out
using the same snapshot API that
is available on the QC view.
You call snapshotImage,
or createSnapShotImageOfType,
and you get it.
One important note about that is
createSnapShotImageOfType does not
return a notori release object.
So be careful about memory leaks here.
Last but not least,
we have full integration
in the new Core Animation.
So there is a new Core Animation layer
that's called the QC Composition Layer.
Very straightforward to create,
just Composition Layer with a file,
file being a composition file on disk.
And then you can use similar APIs to
the one on QC View and QC Renderer to
be able to retrieve the attributes of
the Composition and communicate with it.
Finally,
we have a conveniency that is the
new Composition Parameter View.
If you have your composition
and you want to display in the
UI all the parameters at once,
no need to build it yourself anymore.
You can just use the standard
QC Composition Parameter View.
Very easy to use.
All you have to do is call
setCompositionRenderer on it and
you can pass either a QC view,
a QC renderer,
or a new core animation layer.
And it exists in two versions,
either as an embedded view or as a
standalone patterned version as well.
Let's do a demo of those new features.
First one I wanted to show you is
a new patch that's really cool.
It's called Mathematical Expression.
So here I have a basic composition
that displays two Apple logos on the
bottom left and top right corners and
they're actually anchored to the screen.
So when I resize the composition,
the Apple logo stays in the corners.
It might sound simple,
but it's not that simple
because in Quartz Composer,
our coordinate system, well,
we want one unit horizontally to be
always the same as one unit vertically.
So which means when you resize
and change the aspect ratio,
well,
the coordinate system slightly changes.
So you need to do a little computation
to make sure the Apple stays anchored.
If you were to do it using the Mat Patch,
well, each Mat Patch can do
a number of operations,
but they have to be sequential and so on.
So this is what we would need.
We would need two Mat Patches
for the X and two Mat Patches for
the Y coordinate of the Apple.
Well,
I can do the same thing here with the new
Mathematical Expression Patch where where
whatever the number of mat operation,
you just have one.
The way it works is you simply type
formula and automatically it populates
the inputs and outputs of the patch.
So for instance,
I can add something here.
And now I can go back to the inputs.
And you can see-- there we go.
It just works.
What we did with that mathematical
expression is also the ability for
you to indirectly use it anywhere.
So I can just enter computations.
"In any text field where you enter
numerical values and it just works.
So that's pretty useful."
What's even more useful
is the Composition Loader
I talked about earlier,
and I just want to do
a quick overview here.
Remember, it's going to be covered
in tomorrow's session.
So what I have here is a composition
that has two composition loaders.
What you do with it is you specify
the location of a composition on disk,
or URL, something like that.
And it will load the composition and
render it as if it was just embedded
in the original composition here.
So in that example,
I'm loading the slide composition,
which is one of our examples,
and rendering it here.
And on top of that,
I added a particle system,
just to show you that an
integration is straightforward.
What's better is the input parameters
and outputs of the composition
you load are also accessible.
So here,
I have the shape input and the color
input of that slide composition
that are available as well.
So that means I can just
change the composition,
and it all works.
Composition loader is very
powerful because you can now
take a monolithic composition
and explode it into a master one,
kind of an assembly composition,
and a number of sub-compositions.
And then you can have graphic
artists work on sub-composition
and so on and they don't break
anything in a master composition.
Everything's independent.
Another patch of interest
is the XML Downloader.
A number of people have been doing
kind of Ajax kind of things but inside
Quartz Composer using RSS and kind of
formatting the data using RSS and so on.
So what we have now is
an easier way to do that.
There is XML support so you
can have here more XML file.
It's purely arbitrary format.
What I just did is I built that
as a list of images and for each
entry you have a pass to a file.
You have the name to display as well as a
color to kind of colorize the image with.
Pretty simple.
Now I build that composition
here that reads that same XML.
Let me just make that a bit bigger.
That same XML file
Using the new XML Downloader
Patch and you can see it's produced
as a Quartz Composer structure.
Then you can do all the
usual operations with it.
You can parse the structure,
extract the members,
so in that case the location of the file,
the text to display and the
color to modulate it with it.
And then there is some timing
logic but ultimately it displays
all that thing on screen.
So now you have a Composition whose
original dataset is just an XML file.
One of the experimental patches
we have right now is GLSL support.
So I'm saying experimental
because it's not fully finished,
but you can already play with it
and do pretty powerful things.
So I got a couple of
GLSL composition here.
So that's the usual OpenGL teapot.
I'm sure you've seen that before.
And what happens here is it's rendered
with a GLSL shader on top of it.
The way it works is that the
GLSL shader in the inspector,
you can display the vertex shader
and fragment shader and edit it in
real time there and all the changes
reflect in the viewer window.
The GLSL shader patch is a macro patch,
so it loads the shader and then
everything that you put inside
that macro patch is rendered
and affected by the shader.
In that case, we have just a trackball to
do the rotation thing and
we have the teapot object.
The same way you use
the Core Image Kernel to
write your own kernels,
here you could write your own
GLSL shaders and any changes
you do here regarding the
uniforms of the GLSL shader,
namely the variables,
public variables if you want,
will appear automatically
as input of the GLSL patch.
Let me show you another example.
In that case,
it's doing a simple environment
mapping using that source image.
Here we go.
Pretty simple as well.
I would like to show you now
the Core Animation integration.
So here I have a simple
Core Animation app that is used
to browse your-- in that case,
the file hierarchy on disk.
And the background is, of course,
Composer Composition.
The way it's added is just a
layer in Core Animation world.
You create the layer from
the Composition file,
insert it at the proper place
in the Core Animation tree,
and boom, you're done.
And you got perfect rendering.
It's all synchronized with the
display rate and all of that.
And the input parameters of the
Composition are still accessible.
So that's really powerful when you
combine core animation with the layering
system and you have real time synthesized
content that comes from Quartz Composer,
especially considering that Quartz
Composer renders at arbitrary sizes.
And core animation takes that into
account as well to make sure the
Quartz Composer layer is always
rendered at its optimal size,
ensuring maximum quality.
Back to slides, please.
So we've seen a lot today,
but if you were to
remember only a few things,
which I hope you're not going to do,
but remember more,
Quartz Composer is really a
visual programming environment
and you can use it for two things,
primarily.
Explore the world of all our
graphics technologies on Mac OS X.
Remember, we have Core Image,
we have GLSL, we have OpenGL,
all those things you can play with
in a single unified environment.
You can use it to create compositions
that have input parameters.
So we call them
parameterized compositions.
And those are very powerful and you
can use them in your application,
communicate with them and so on.
We made it easy for you to integrate
those compositions in your applications.
A new thing in Leopard is
the composition repository.
So you should definitely try to
leverage that to add visual effects
and animations to your applications and
let the user pick those compositions.
For simple integration,
there is all the interface builder,
Cocoa binding support and
we have those super simple
playback APIs with the QC view.
And in Mac OS X Leopard,
we have the ability to
write custom patches,
the ability to add your
own effects to photo boost,
eye chat and so on.
We have animated desktop support
and the WebKit support as well.
Remember, we have two Quartz Composer
sessions coming tomorrow.
The first one at 10:30 in the morning
will be ""Creating Your Quartz Composer
Composition."" The one in the afternoon
will be ""Advanced Quartz Composer,""
which is more programming techniques,
how to write your own patches and really
use Quartz Composer to the maximum.
For more information about the
Quartz Composer technology,
please refer to Alan Schaffer,
our 2D and 3D graphics evangelist.
As usual,
you can get documentation sample
code from the WWDC website.
Three labs of interest:
the Late Night Graphics and Media Lab,
they will be Quartz Composer forks here.
It's tomorrow at 6pm.
Then there is a dedicated Quartz
Composer Lab which is Thursday at 3:30
and there is also a Core Image Lab at
the same time in the same place.